I walked the floor of the White House
night after night until midnight and I
am not ashamed to tell you gentlemen
that I went down on my knees and prayed
almighty gods for light and guidance
more than one night and one night it
came to me this way I don't know how it
was but it came one that we could not
give them back to Spain that would be
cowardly in dishonorable to that we
could not turn them to France or Germany
that would be bad business and
discreditable three that we could not
leave them to themselves they were unfit
for self-government and they would soon
have anarchy and this rule over they're
worse than Spain's was and for that
there was nothing left for us to do but
to take them all and to educate the
Filipinos and to uplift and civilize and
Christianize them and by God's grace do
the very best we could by them as our
fellow man for whom Christ also died so
said president William McKinley in 1899
this set the stage for the Central
Intelligence Agency some 51 years later
in the aftermath of World War two to
begin its practice of counterinsurgency
tonight's program is the first in a
series of KPFK top secret radio
examinations of the history and
activities of the Central Intelligence
Agency this coverage leads up to the
live broadcasting of a special
investigation of the CIA by the United
States Senate now scheduled for early
July founded under the National Security
Act of 1947 the CIA was supposed to
centralize intelligence gathering but it
was not long before the agency began to
try to influence the course of events
around the world in the late 40s the
agency sponsored underground movements
in the Ukraine Poland and Albania all of
them failed the Philippines was to be a
rich field for experimentation in
counterinsurgency this program is taken
largely from the writings of William J
Pomeroy born in New York in 1916 William
Palmer I fought in the Philippines
against the Japanese in world war ii
there he learned of the Huq movement of
filipinos also fighting the Japanese
after the war he returned to the islands
to study he met and married a fellow
student Celia Moreno from 1950 to 1952
he fought with the Hutt guerilla
movement there is a common belief that
Filipinos are a volatile people quick to
anger and to action like all beliefs
about a people
it is generally untrue the Filipino has
known foreign domination and a feudal
oppression for so long that they have
numbed him into resignation bahala na he
says leave it to God who that is free
can know the meaning of a colonial
mentality every white man who walks in
the streets even though he be a
Beachcomber is deserving of respect and
of special consideration the landlord is
a lord indeed when you pass before him
bow low with your hand to the ground
like a plough
when you enter a tienda and see on the
Shelf the foreign and the filipino
product by the foreign of course it must
be superior and don't ever forget to
raise the hand of the parent to the brow
to kiss the hand of the priest to watch
the hand of command raised by the
capitis when this occurs for 400 years
under the arrogant Spaniard and for
fifty more years under the brashley
superior American there is something
that happens to the temperament of a
people a theory exists that misery
breeds revolt but that is true most
often when misery follows from a loss of
what one has had but when one has known
nothing but misery for 450 years it
crushes subdues becomes a pattern of
life the few who revolt are butchered
the amak is shot down in the street the
many squat in the door of a hut and look
out with lackluster eyes at the will of
God only the most powerful of reasons
can stir such a people to revolt they
will not rise merely if a man stands
before them shouting you are miserable a
revolution is not easy it can mean death
and even with misery
life can be precious such people only
turn to revolt
when between life and death there is
little difference but what can a man do
when the soil that he turns cannot be
his nor the fruits that he grows when
the land that he was told would be free
remains in the control of foreigners
when the foreigner drives over his roads
and a shiny car that blows dust in his
eyes where he sits in his carabao cart
when the men that he really elects to
office are out stood without cause as
they try to speak for him when he sees
his leaders murdered his unions outlawed
his body Oh raided and looted his home
burned in the night his wife and
daughters raped before his eyes when he
knows that he must go gaunt all the
years of his life there are some things
that cannot be left to God the
full-scale armed struggle that occurred
in the Philippines between 1946 and 1956
and that has persisted in various lesser
forms to the present time was the direct
consequence of US policy that forced
this situation on the Filipino popular
movement and that persisted in
suppressive policies at every point
where a democratic settlement might have
been negotiated known inaccurately as
the Huq rebellion the struggle began
actually as armed defense by the
organized peasants against the Sasson
nation's mass killings torture and
destruction of villages by forces of the
neo-colonial government at first calling
for a democratic peace the communist-led
movement only gradually as conditions in
the country and the mood of the people
developed changed to increasing emphasis
on armed struggle for
call for revolutionary overthrow the
regime was not issued until the
beginning of 1950 far from having
planned insurrection the Communist Party
although retaining arms ready for use in
any eventualities was still
insufficiently prepared for the scale of
military suppression launched against
this masses and a period of confusion
ensued for a few months before some form
of organized response could be obtained
over the spontaneous defensive reaction
by Arne peasants under local communist
organizations the name Huck below hub
anti-japanese People's Army continued
for example to be used by the movement
for nearly two years and was not changed
to army of national liberation to fit
the new period until 1948 when the
Communist Party felt compelled to make
armed struggle the main form of struggle
and to embark on national expansion this
coincided with the breakdown of
exploratory negotiations for a
Democratic nationalist oriented peace
with the new government of President
Kiir Dino who had assumed office on the
death of Manuela Rojas the breakdown was
caused by the sabotaging pressure of US
officials who persuaded Kirino not to
proceed with the talks and it served as
Communist Party leaders expected to help
expose the neo-colonial character of the
Philippine government in this period the
left-wing movement still retained length
with moderate bourgeois democratic
nationalists inclined elements in the
Nacionalista party with which it had
been in coalition in the 1946 election a
confidential HMB Nacionalista election
understanding was in effect as late as
the November 1949 presidential election
reached in negotiations with the
nationalistic candidate Jose Laurel who
pledged that his party would stage an
armed uprising in coordination with the
armed struggle of the hnb if the Corina
regime cheated him out of what should
have been an assured victory the
Communist Party backed the Nacionalista
party in 1949 with what had called
critical support Kirino used glaringly
obvious massive fraud and terror to
defeat Laurel who then failed to carry
out his armed uprising the u.s. han was
believed to have restrained Laurel it
was after this episode that the
Communist Party in the hmb went ahead
with their own formal call for the
overthrow of the imperii
list puppet regime the hmb was
encouraged to take this step by a number
of factors mass antagonism existed
toward the Rosasco reno governments for
the terror and brutality of their
suppressive policies for the fraud and
corruption they flagrantly practiced for
failure to implement agrarian reform
laws and for the economic difficulties
caused the population by the workings of
the u.s. Philippine Trade Act
wherever Communist Party and HTM be
organizers went they met with welcome
and support from the people who
applauded their military successes over
government forces in addition the
victory of the Chinese Revolution in
1949 had given the illusion that a
similar victory was possible in the
short term in the Philippines by the
same means an underestimation was made
of u.s. imperialist capacity and ponies
to intervene and to put up an all-out
defense of its positions in Asia
including the Philippines the communist
party leadership made the projection in
January 1950 that the next two years
would be decisive for the preparations
for the seizure of power creating an
impression in the movement that victory
was not far off all cadres were
therefore thrown into the armed struggle
in its expansion with other forms of
struggle and of organization abandoned
without US intervention there was a
likelihood that the movement would have
overthrown the kirino regime as it was
poorly armed and ill-equipped as far as
military technology was concerned the
hmb and the political Contras of the
Communist Party achieved wonders in the
expansion campaign from an original mass
base and no more than five Luzon
provinces the hmb and the party expanded
between 1948 and 51 to twenty seven
provinces extending over almost the
whole of Luzon to the central islands of
penne and Negros and south to Mindanao
in most of these provinces substantial
mass bases and armed forces were created
the discounted US intervention however
was quick to come having advised
suppression as a policy from 1946
onwards and having interceded to prevent
any settlement with the Communists led
movement that might have permitted it
democratic freedoms US interests were
faced with a foreign larger problem than
they had expected when the hmb took the
offensive in early 1950 the US missions
the Bell
and the Pentagon Melb mission promptly
was sent to the Philippines to prepare
economic political and especially
military measures to deal with it the
main role was assigned to the joint US
military advisory group just mag which
reorganized the Philippine defense
department put its own man Ramon
Magsaysay at its head reorganized the
Philippine Army into 28 battalion combat
teams trained for counterinsurgency and
poured in military aid to equip them a
CIA team sent together with these
missions played a major part in the
counter-offensive that followed it
reorganized Philippine intelligence
services and masterminded the CAPTCHA in
Manila in October 1950 of the general
secretary the Philippine Communist Party
and two other political Bureau members
who were in charge of directing the
overall liberation struggle this blow
which included the capture of the
movements detailed plans came at a
critical juncture in the struggle
causing a loss of initiative and a
temporary loss of direction to the
movement that had grave consequences on
us advice the Congress of labor
organizations was outlawed and all of
its leaders imprisoned the National
peasant Union had been outlawed earlier
spearheaded by the labor activities of
the u.s. controlled Jesuits Catholic
trade unions and peasants unions the
federation of free workers and the
federation of free peasants was set up
under the direction of us priests to try
to occupy the vacuum left by the
outlawing of the left-wing unions
it was the induced magnetic charge of
rebellion complexed with murder robbery
arson and kidnapping that was applied to
all arrested communists and hawks
enabling death sentences and life
sentences to be handed out and bailed to
be denied although there was no such
crime in the Philippine Penal Code and
Philippine Supreme Court years later
declared the charge illegal military
campaigns by the gist mag directed
Philippine Army had decimated the Huq
movement by 1952
and by 1956 the remaining Communist
Party leadership decided while retaining
some armed units in being to shift the
main emphasis of the continuing
liberation struggle from armed to legal
and peaceful forms the Communist Party
had been unsuccessful in converting a
struggle begun defense
into a victorious offensive however
although the military effort at national
liberation had been severely setback US
policymakers failed in their central aim
of destroying the Economist party which
remained in being despite heavy losses
the shift in tactics from the mid-50s
onward was further more not entirely a
retreat it was adopted with recognition
of nationalist trends but on by economic
controls and made other forms of
struggle possible within less than a
decade the Communist Party had regained
its organizational strength and was
participating in a resurgence of the
popular movement the role of US
imperialism in the defeat of the Huq
struggle had been openly and frequently
admitted and boasted about by the US
government and its military and
intelligence agencies credit for the
suppression campaigns military and
political is given to Brigadier General
then Colonel Edward Lansdale the CIA
agent who on the basis of his philippine
success was later assigned to build up
nose mzm and his apparatus of
suppression in south vietnam however the
Communist Party and assessing the period
of the Huq armed struggle in an
underground plenum of its Central
Committee in 1969 while pointing to the
main role of u.s. imperialist
intervention in the preservation of the
discredited neo-colonial regime sharply
criticized its own errors and
shortcomings as having contributed
greatly to the setback among these were
an erroneous estimate that a
revolutionary situation existed in 1950
that made a call for overthrow of the
government practicable an erroneous
estimate of the capacity of US interest
to commit themselves fully against the
liberation movement an incorrect line of
neglecting a proper combination of many
forms of struggle in favor of total
emphasis on armed struggle a failure to
develop United Front forms of
organization and struggle to gain
participation of those not ready to take
up arms one shortcoming was that the
National Liberation anti-imperialist
character at the struggle was not widely
understood the neo-colonial nature of
independence not having become apparent
generally the main motivations that
brought recruits into the hmb were
agrarian abuses and the terror and
corruption of the Filipino government
that is class struggle issues when the
u.s. puppet
Ramon Magsaysay was elected president in
1953 as a reformist while openly
proclaiming support from the
neo-colonialist he won support even in
the hoc mass base areas his propaganda
about agrarian labor and political
reforms being clutched at hopefully by
many people despite its military defeat
the Huq struggle however did have a
profound effect on the Philippines it
compelled attention to land reform and
caused Alby it with twists and turns the
breakdown of the semi-feudal tenancy
system it contributed to the growth of
nationalist contradictions with US
policy in the subsequent period it
lifted mass struggle to a new level and
gave inspiration to further popular
movements to come let us now return to a
time when the guerrilla movement felt
strong and follow the struggle for their
eyes a supply unit is in from the post
in town the men come up the last slope
in the strung out ragged line it's
rained on the trail and their muddy to
the waist they've cut Anna believes and
tied them over the loads they carry to
keep him dry one by one they come in and
drop the heavy sacks by the supply Hut
others from the camp come up to tease
the weary arrivals about going to town
for a good time nothing could be said
more truly than that this struggle is
born on the backs of the people
everything is carried food utensils
office equipment arms and ammunition
supplies of every variety I'm
continuously being amazed at the weights
the ordinary hmb soldier can bear not
only to lift but to carry for days at a
time here's an average Filipino peasant
five feet and a few inches over in
height body thin with undernourishment
legs covered with scarred
of beriberi sores he stands ready for
the trail slung low on his back is a
burlap sack one-third full of rice try
hefting it with straps of rattan cutting
into his shoulders on top of this is a
typewriter standard size fastened to the
same straps and covering it one of the
large iron frying pans
besides this tied to the same bundle
that now towers is his own pack of
personal belongings his bandolier of
ammunition is carried forward at the
waist and his rifle cradled forward to
ready to fire
he's barefooted this man is not an
exception he's an average Huck on the
trail and such a load may be carried all
day and every day for weeks over steep
mountains slick with mud through rivers
up cliffside niches belowed may vary
instead of a typewriter he may have a
sack of mimeograph paper or other food
or iron cooking pots or a 5-gallon can
of kerosene for lamps or a mimeograph
machine
he's also expected to and will fight ask
him how he manages to do this as I have
done and his answer will be exploitation
is a heavier load the enemy has all the
transportation facilities that he needs
Swift trucks on a good network of
highways trains motor boats in the
rivers plains to drop supplies daily the
Huck's have not one truck not even a
pack animal no highways but the narrow
footpaths
often treacherous each Huck is the
transportation unit in himself the men
joke about the loads they carry and
boast a little too when they're not on
the supply detail the squad ballot on it
is called they take a squad ballot on
holiday and go down to the groves to get
a load of coconuts they raid each other
by the number of coconuts that they
carry him they say oh he's a forty
coconut man there's a joke too around
the fire in the hut at night the carry
heavy study every joke
those who learn faster and have
potentialities of development as leaders
are sent to schools they graduate from
the squad Balaton and become study heavy
types who have work other than carrying
loads around the fire they say they have
brains
we have backs it's easier to have a back
the still come themselves is hardly
accurate every Huck has a book in his
pack or a mimeograph text the forest
enclosing the hidden world hides to the
system by which it works in fights
beyond the eyes of enemies is the
shadowy framework of an army end of a
political system here in our buried camp
our Regional Command number four and its
complement Regional Committee number
four the former the command directs the
organization and operation of the armed
force of the national liberation
movement in this region embracing the
provinces of Laguna Southern Kazon
Batangas and covet the latter the
committee is the regional organization
of the political wing of the Huq
movement the Ricoh system was not set up
until 1948 prior to that there were
roughly Central Luzon and Southern Luzon
districts in each of which repressions
and fighting were going on a loose
rather fluid condition existed then much
of it a spontaneous struggle of
resistance against the government
campaign of suppression which was
directed in the main against the peasant
unions there was much confusion and a
lack of central guidance old
anti-japanese guerrilla units had
reformed to fight new units had arisen
and independence and anarchy
characterized their operations the
Communist Party itself committed to
legal struggle after the war now also
the object of suppression was
disorganized and without clear strategic
and tactical aims but a struggle of this
kind demands firm centralized guidance
for all its informality a guerrilla
movement degenerates without such
leadership a political organization
therefore separate from the armed force
but protected by it was gradually
evolved many of its members are
communists many have been local
organizers of the democratic alliance
some are leaders of guerrilla units
other than the ha
Vala ha which fought the japanese for
real freedom and were disillusioned by
what happened after the war many also
were peasant union leaders and trade
union leaders the hmb which strictly
speaking is the armed force alone
although we all call ourselves hawks
functions like a mass organisation only
a few of its members are communists many
of the commanders of the guerrilla units
do not belong to the party and the
overwhelming number of soldiers do not
it is considered a privilege for a Huk
to become a party member in the barrios
and towns where the whole population
usually belongs to the pro hmb mass
organizations and each locality has its
underground barrio council there are
only a sprinkling of communists none in
a great many Barrios yet the party is
known and accepted its individual
members known and idolized it has gained
its influence by the heroic example of
its members who have shown themselves
ready to die for the people in some of
the towns near this camp of ours there
is not a single communist party member
but the entire town is solidly Pro Huk
up to and including town officials above
all the rico's and the field commands
and the district organising committees
is the most hidden of all the organs the
Secretariat it is the executive body of
the political wing of the Huq movement
the sect today lives and functions in
Manila itself the hidden world having
its center at the center of the open
world soon however the sect too will
join us in the forest and all will be
hidden here and ready the forest is a
strange place for freedom to live
wherever one would turn there's a wall
of trees it's a wall to all sides and
the wall above shutting out the sky in
the open world
there were horizons here the only
horizon is in the heart when we were in
the city living openly but moving in the
underground we felt compressed aware of
eyes from our window we peered forth at
the street wondering who's standing
under the light upon the corner when we
were on a moving bus how many agents at
between us and the door we learned for
the sanction
of the forest where no I could spy or
agent sees now we are here in the forest
where no one moves freely house he will
no one takes a stroll upon a forest
trail
only those with assignment pass through
the guard posts to the camp's perimeter
to do otherwise would invite suspicion
and besides the enemy too moves on the
trails
sometimes upon the trail ourselves we
come to a river cutting a twisted avenue
through the trees crossing it we stop in
the middle
look up at an unexpected sky feel Sun
feel unimpeded air sea blue for a moment
the world is open then we plunge back
into the forest as if afraid of day we
think now is the time of coming out of
the forest into the free streets of
cities a revolutionary who fights for
freedom savers at least knowing it only
within himself there was a time when the
forest was wholly ours and we lived in
it as within a fortress issuing for that
will to spread panic among our foes the
enemy does not dare to enter we would
say we will carry the fight to him
now the forest is like a breached wall
through which the government troops pour
at their will there is no place in the
forest to which they cannot go armed
with their massive firepower and we are
the ones who move step aside
take cover there are Ranger units
american-trained that enter the forest
at a far point and travel through it
quietly seeking at our camps our forces
to Rove about seeking them it is like
two blind men in a darkened room who
when they come into contact lash out
desperately blood alee we do not seek
encounters now only rarely entering a
town or attacking Army Garrison's
ammunition is hard to get and it is
difficult to replace a gun that wears
out or is taken to the enemy by a
surrender II ambushes once a prime
source of weapons are hard to stage now
when army troops move on the highways in
large convoys heavily armed of course
there is always the black market and the
smugglers but the prices have gone up
fantastically and we also lack funds the
trails too are no longer ours when our
units go down to the towns to pick up
purchasers the army often lies in ambush
and our men are slaughtered at times 10
or a dozen die upon emerging from the
forest our squads Balaton returned to
camp with one man missing two men
missing familiar faces gone from the
huts in the social hall we used to ask
them where is Petrine or where his
source are gone and they would go on by
with averted eyes answering in the brief
way of men who do not wish to talk about
the matter he is dead now we merely
count them silently as they come in
tiredly
one or two at a time the others are not
discouraged after losing a comrade they
tie on the empty sacks and go off on the
trail whenever their turns arrive we
will be more careful this time they say
enemy raids go on continually along the
forests edge striking at our district
committees that have the direct contact
with organization in the barrios our
organizers died in lonely Hut's and
sudden bursts of fire that come out of
underbrush and yet somewhere a new Hut
goes up smaller more skillfully hidden
with someone new assigned to occupy it
but we are being bled of cadres in the
barrios the army or the civilian guards
have permanent barracks now and are
always among the people there are more
informers because they feel protected
and it's harder for huts to reach and to
liquidate them our contact men have to
crawl past guards to get into a body Oh
some of the Huck's are bitter about the
people the people they say are
opportunistic when we are with them they
are friendly to us when the enemy is
with them they are friendly to the enemy
but it is wrong to be idealistic about
the people they are flesh and blood and
they suffer much we are in the forest
where we can hide and fight but they are
naked to suppression they are helpless
before abuse and who can stand up to
abuse and robbery month after month
after month they make their compromises
but the other side does not win them
they are ours and they will always be
there ready to follow us when we are
able to lead them but when we try to
take the offensive today our comrades
die die by the dozens and arms and
equipment still pour ashore in Manila
from American ships and new battalion
combat teams still take to the field the
truth is we have lost the initiative
that we sought to take we are back where
we started from completely on the
defensive there is the sensation now of
being in a vise from the beginning of
this struggle in 1946 the movement was
on the defensive the struggle began with
the use of the mailed fist against us
and not with our bold launching for
years the Hux have fought to get out of
the vies of repression for a time many
months ago we thought that all signs
favored it and we took the offensive
ourselves but now the iron sides of
circumstance closed
in on us again in Manila where a few
months ago we had sent a whole new team
of condors almost the entire city
committee is arrested in a single night
of raids it had sought to organize to
boldly in too quickly without proper
safeguards against a greatly intensified
enemy intelligence here too there is a
betrayal by a woman whom we had trusted
and who had put agents on the trail of a
courier who had visited her in the
Visayas on the island of Panay rico six
is broken through the act of a leading
Padre
Alfredo Gloria who went over to the
enemy and who led military intelligence
agents disguised as Huck's into the reco
camp and who himself helped to shoot
down his former comrades and a civilian
and former from the body on pnai leads
army troops to the camp of guillermo
cappadocia and they shoot him down in
the dawn when he emerges from his heart
these are betrayals there are uglier
forms the district committee member who
kills the district secretary decapitates
him and brings the bloody head in a sack
to the army to claim the reward the Huq
in the outpost who rises in the middle
of the night and tommy guns his two
companions trading their heads two for
his freedom and money
betrayal seldom occur when the tempo is
high when victory is at octave thing
they happen when the ground gives way
and uncertainty yawns then the weak run
to make their accommodations with those
who appear to be strong the tempo is
slack the struggle is now prolonged it's
a time when renewals are needed but the
well of determination is not equally
deep in us all we sit upon this island
and see the guns pour in for those whom
we fight whatever allies we might have
they can reach no hand to us the sea is
there between us the sea too is a vice
that squeezes in our isolated lives we
do not have space here we live and move
in the same space that the enemy
occupies there's no place to retreat no
place that is not accessible by Road by
plane or by a couple of days on the
trail
no question here of liberated areas and
the ciaz always at our backs in this
confined space with an aggressive enemy
there is only continual movement that
can preserve us
but mobility too has its Menace our
armed forces fight March fight March
fight until they are exhausted with no
time or place to rest and to recuperate
we look at a map and wonder where to
move next it's no longer victory that
preoccupies us it's survival intertwined
with the US supervised police
preparations where the ubiquitous
operations of the CIA which in the
Philippines has had one of its happiest
fields of activity dating from the days
of the Lansdale creation of Max they say
as an ideal frontman the number of
leading Filipino political and
government figures freely known in the
Philippines and mentioned in its press
as having been CIA recruits students in
CIA training schools or subsidized by
CIA funds is startling
they include senator Benigno Aquino
secretary-general of the Liberal Party
Raoul Mangal AAPIs former senator former
undersecretary for Foreign Affairs and a
max ace a founder and head of the
Catholic Church's Christian social
movement senator Haddad Oh max sa rather
the former president former Senator
Manuel Manahan general is my illapis
former head of the military intelligence
service
Joaquin Chino Roces owner and publisher
of the Manila Times was a Cree soul and
a secretary of national defense in the
max a say and Marcos administration's
eleuterio are oversaw wartime pro-us
guerrilla chief head of the max a safer
president movement in 1953 and
innumerable other personages
university administration economic
planning bodies student organizations
trade unions police establishments
intelligence agencies religious groups
and journalism so wide flung have CIA
activities being that mutual suspicions
exist everywhere in ruling circles over
who might actually be an agent the
National Intelligence coordinating
agency nikka the country's top level
intelligence body admitted in 1971 that
three CIA agents were serving for
liaison purposes on its directing staff
in another field one of the exposed CIA
international fund channels the
committee for cultural freedom
subsidized the Philippine magazine
solidarity that sought to influence
Filipino intellectual and liberal
elements in 1970 exposure was made of a
CIA operation for infiltration and
control the Philippine trade unions its
channel was the so called Asia America
free labor institute in which jail of
stones afl-cio international agency well
known as a CIA front was the directing
force the AAF Li working through the
Philippine Department of Labor had
handed out half a million dollars for
educating trade union leaders in free
world principles when the operation was
revealed by trade unionists to whom
offers had been made Union protests
compelled the Department of Labor to
cancel its endorsement of a AFL I it had
52 trade union officials on its payroll
as trainees while they continued working
in their own unions the AAF Li was only
one of a variety of CIA instruments
employed against the Philippine labor
movement another well established
channel is the Asian labor education
center attached to the state-run
University of the Philippines one of the
most publicized CIA operations was a
movement called Philippine statehood USA
that got underway in mid 71 a CIA agent
named West was reported as acting as its
advisor it was launched with expensive
full-page advertisements in the Manila
papers calling for US statehood for the
Philippines as national chairman it had
an ex Ming Tsai Tsai aide Rufino D
Antonio a former congressman and real
estate speculator and a Secretary
General Bartolome Caban bond
Reserve colonel in the Philippine Armed
Forces close to the just mag the
movement began enrolling alleged members
and in June 72 it claimed that five
million seven hundred thousand had been
enrolled these were mainly in rural
areas for illiteracy and poverty
approval n't and were slick organizers
asked people to sign forms of membership
written in English that they could not
read they were told that with us
statehood unemployment and poverty would
vanish that billions of dollars of US
capital would arrive and make the
Philippines prosperous as the base for
manufacturing distribution of US
commodities in Asia except for the
billions of dollars and the prosperity
such propaganda fitted strikingly in
with us multinational plans in Asia also
in Philippines statehood propaganda was
agitation against confiscation or
nationalization of US investment
interests in the country a propaganda
line greatly stepped up when the
Philippine Supreme Court ruled in August
of 1972 that US properties acquired
under parity must terminate in 1974
together with this was a virulent
anti-communism that lumped all
nationalists anti-imperialist student
activists and others as communists and
enemies without statehood warned Antonio
communism becomes a very attractive
alternative the statehood movement was
set up as one means of reinforcing US
demands for a continuation of investment
privileges after 1974 it acted as a
pressure group on the constitutional
convention with which its organization
coincided and could have been a means of
mobilizing a yes vote for a constitution
with us privileges if a plebiscite had
ever been held statehood leaders talked
of establishing a new political party to
promote its aims significantly not a
single official in the US Embassy in
Manila or Washington made any uh
turrents to throw cold water on what was
an obviously fraudulent scheme that
misled many Filipinos in the name of the
United States most ominous of its
features was the presence of numerous
ranking army officers in its leading
posts and its outline of a militarized
movement colonel jose mari stella vice
chairman for Luzon Colonels concepcin
Cardenas
Enrique Perez and
le sigue as directors-general for
military affairs colonel laviano ramirez
and lieutenant food NCO Montero as
directors general for intelligence and
security and Colonel Francisco Ave Maria
and Houston Jana Mendoza as directors
general for veterans organizations in
this and its other operations the
importance of the CIA is that like the
juice mag it had the apparatus to work
from within Philippine ruling circles in
which it has been able to play a subtle
and often devious game of pitting one
Filipino leader against another as will
be pointed out CIA activities were
intensive in the events leading up to
martial law the clearest evidence of us
assisted preparation over a considerable
period of time for martial law and
military dictatorship is the greatly
expanded activity and organization of
the Philippine Army of all sectors of
the Philippine establishment the Armed
Forces have been the most closely
connected to us control agencies the
juice mag functioning under the military
assistance agreement continues to the
present to be the directing element of
the Philippine Army which it arms equips
and trains and which consequently has
had no independence to develop policies
of its own or to depart when the
policies laid down by the Pentagon
whatever role the Philippine Army has
come to play it could not conceivably be
contrary to the recommendations of its
us Mentors
during the Ming Tsai Tsai years the army
was relied upon heavily with innumerable
officers retired or on leave becoming
government department heads and Chiefs
of projects the Army in the field itself
assuming civil affairs tasks after mcc's
I saw much of this military invasion of
government was weeded out its revival
however became sharply noticeable from
1969 onwards the year of the
pronouncement of the Nixon Doctrine
militarization can be traced in the rise
of the military budget during the Marcos
administration when Marcos first became
president in 1965 the army budget was
271 point 1 million pesos for the year
it rose gradually to 320 4.2 million
pesos in 1966 and 366 million pesos in
by 1968 by which time the just mag would
have had a foreknowledge of developing
US policy the bigger jumps began to 415
million pesos they progressed in this
way 1969 513 million pesos 1970 670
million pesos 1971 740 million pesos
1972 815 million pesos the political
opposition to Marcos during the use to
which he would put his command of the
army held down actual sums proposed
Marcos demanded a far higher budget
proposing 1492 million pesos for the
fiscal year sixty-nine seventy and
twelve hundred million pesos verse
1972-73
in 1971 Marcos obtained endorsement from
the Philippine Congress for the
Philippine Army to be increased in its
54,000 troop level to 80,000 this
coincided with the beginning of us-based
transfer to the Philippines the saintly
point naval station having been turned
over in 71 in general expansion of the
philippine army and of its role
paralleled the period of the Nixon
doctrine of Asian ization and of having
u.s. Asian partners share the burden
from 1969 also the role of the
Philippine Army began to expand home
defense units of a civic action
character began to appear in some
provinces in the following year in
January 1971 a new home defense office
was created at staffed level under the
chief of staff there were now two deputy
Chiefs of Staff one for military and one
for home defense the latter being headed
by Brigade general Fidel Ramos
objectives of the home defense units
according to major Domingo Villanueva
chief of the plans and policy branch
under General Ramos in an interview with
the graphic magazine in Manila in 1971
were firstly to unify into a single
program reserve forces and armed forces
of the Philippine civic action and/or
civil assistance activities secondly to
establish home defense centers in all
the provinces thirdly to assist and/or
support national socio-economic
development programs of the government
and similar activities of the private
sector and lastly to enlist the
cooperation of the people the AFP's
effort to help the government
if not resolved political economic and
sociological problems by civil
assistance was meant disaster relief and
mercy activities emergency civil support
Civil Works National Development support
and law enforcement support another type
of activity was community relations
which included civic action programs
command information public relations and
psychological operations under Civic
action programs 65 civic action centers
were set up at least one for each
province 20 rural health teams and 22
engineer construction battalions were
activated these participated in rice
production and resettlement projects
political opponents of Marcos protested
against army encroachment on the
Department of Public Works and
communications the Department of Health
Community Development Land Authority and
other government branches by 1972 the
Army and national economic development
programs has mapped out with the
assistance of AI dee' began to be
integrated for regional infrastructure
operation centers were set up to
coordinate infrastructure projects
recommended by the AI dee' were
organized to correspond to the four
military areas in the country the
centre's being located in the area
military headquarters themselves the us
guiding hand between the whole home
defense concept came into the open
although unpublicized at the time in
January 1972 when 40 man Special Forces
teams of the US Army began joint
operations with Filipino troops in
selected areas of the Philippines these
US teams were sent from the headquarters
of the first Special Forces Group on
Okinawa they did not wear their
identifying Green Berets in the
operations according to a US officer
Clark Air Base for fear of causing
unwarranted concern the first such joint
operation in which US troops were paired
with Filipinos took place quietly on
Palawan Island where minor roads bridges
and community buildings were constructed
and simple medical care was given to
barrio people subsequently the US
Special Forces teams were sent to
operate in Nueva Ecija province
where the moussaka peasant union was
strong to Zamboanga where Muslim
Filipinos were rebelling against land
grabbing and to other provinces these US
Philippines Special Forces activities
were stepped up in the period following
martial law with juice Mak assistance a
National Defense College and staff
schools for each branch of the service
were created these began to give major
attention to political orientation
courses and many of the graduates of
these institutions were put on retired
or leave status and appointed to key
positions in government corporations and
strategic industries at least 38 such
appointments were made by President
Marcos in the year prior to martial law
in some cases generals themselves were
appointed to government positions early
in 1972 Brigadier General Felice
Atherton Abbott who had commanded the
military area covering the Huq region in
Central Luzon became head of the Bureau
of posts where he introduced wholesale
censorship of mail and printed materials
as part of its civic action program the
home defense office in 1971 assumed
supervision of a network of suppressive
bodies called
barrio self-defense units BSD use these
had been established in 1970 again
subsequent to the Nixon Doctrine
announcement in the Central Luzon
provinces where peasant unrest was again
growing prior to that time for a number
of years the army and Philippine
Constabulary had aided landlord backed
civilian commando units CCU and
paramilitary units pmu that had a
vicious record of murder in the barrios
the bsd use were better organized the us
hand being seen and they're being
patterned after units in these strategic
Hamlet's of South Vietnam by the time
martial law was declared the Civic role
of the army was well developed and it
was equipped to carry it out during this
period no hint of criticism or
disagreement with what President Marcos
was doing in the way of militarization
or of increasing the army size and
activity came from the juice nag or from
any US source US Armed Forces in fact
were cooperating with the Civic Action
Program and participating in it it was
not to be assumed that preparation of
the army for home defense and civic
action
was connected necessarily with any
particular political faction in the
Philippines it was being made available
for general policy purposes for whatever
neo-colonial faction came to the fore
the army was not so much the instrument
of Marcos as just mags watchdog ready to
assume full control or to shift its
support elsewhere in case Marcos and his
martial law did not serve US interests
well in June of 1972 the head of the CIA
team in the Philippines George T culeros
and the political attache at the US
Embassy Robert Porter Jr reportedly met
with Marcos and tried to persuade him to
withdraw from running in the 1973
election and to consent to being
replaced by Jaime fed ere long reputed
to be a CIA agent at that time for air
then chairman of the Commission on
Elections blossomed forth in the u.s.
influenced press in Manila as a
compromise presidential possibility
Jaime Faria had been one of the bright
young men chosen by the CIA's Lansdale
as part of the maxis a team in the early
1950s a former Army colonel he was
placed at the head of the Promax ace a
national movement for free elections nem
fro a mainly middle class organization
set up to help prevent president quirino
from committing fraud in the 1953
election subsequently for Ayers
relations were developed with mango APIs
and the CSM and his role as the head of
the Commission on Elections could be
viewed as an attempt by the CIA and the
Jesuits to keep a hand on the conduct of
elections the choice of Ferrer the man
carefully nurtured as clean and
allegedly above dirty politics was
another indication of the CIA's
preference for a christian democratic
reform or clerical fascist alternative
to marcos at the same time however US
ambassador Henry by-road
exhibited a closeness to President
Marcos this seeming division in US
circles over whom to back in the complex
philippine political situation was not
unusual US interests abroad where the
State Department Pentagon CIA or the
local business community try to keep
ties with every group and to ride all
horses up to a point
bitter as their rivalry and struggle for
power might
none of the contending ruling class
groups in the Philippines took a
pronouncedly or basically anti us
position
whoever emerged on the top in the final
showdown US influence would be strong
both in and outside of the councils of
power which to one degree or another
would be expected to make their
arrangements with US interests you've
been listening to a special program
about the CIA in the Philippines based
largely on the writings of William
Pomeroy who fought with a Hutt guerrilla
movement KPFK top secret radio coverage
of the Central Intelligence Agency will
continue next Friday at 7 readings for
the Philippine program were by David
box'll Mike Hodel Emily Schiller Tim
McGovern and Jim Berlin the program was
produced for Pacifica Radio in Los
Angeles by Tim McGovern and Jim Berlin
[Music]